---
layout: post
category: cstheoryrss
title: "Property Testing Review: News for July 2025"
date: 2025-08-01T23:39:05
---

Finally, a post on the first! This month we have four papers, on understanding Nash Equilibria, deeper meditations on distribution testing, sublinear average degree estimation, and a paper on degree distributions that I’m quite excited to see.

**Protocols for Verifying Smooth Strategies in Bandits and Games** by Miranda Christ, Daniel Reichman, and Jonathan Shafer ([arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.10567)). Consider a \(k\)-player game where each player has \(n\) options. Given a (mixed) strategy for each player, we would like to know if this is an approximate Nash equilibrium. But think of \(n\) as extremely large, so algorithms need to be sublinear in \(n\). This is a natural requirement, since in many real-world games, the independent options come from an extremely large space. This paper studies this setting from the verification perspective. Assume the algorithm/verifier can communicate with an all powerful prover, and has access to the game matrix/tensor. We want to verifier to make sublinear queries to the game and have sublinear communication (in bits) with the prover. The main result shows that, under some “smoothness” condition on the near equilibrium strategies, one can actually get such sublinear verifiers for Nash equilibria. The starting results in the paper are for the simpler multi-armed bandit setting, which are generalized to more complex games.

**Faster Estimation of the Average Degree of a Graph Using Random Edges and Structural Queries** by Lorenzo Beretta, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and C. Seshadhri ([arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06925)). The problem of estimating the average degree of a graph in sublinear time is an old and classic problem. In a seminal work, [Goldreich-Ron](https://d-nb.info/991214714/34) gave \((1+\varepsilon)\)-approximations with \(\widetilde{O}(\sqrt{n})\) queries, where \(n\) is the number of vertices. (Up to \(\log n, \varepsilon\) factors, the bound is optimal.) This works in the classic model where an algorithm can sample uar vertices, query degrees, and get neighbors. Suppose uar edges are also available. In that case, [Motwani-Panigrahy-Xu](http://www-cs-students.stanford.edu/~xuying/papers/sample_icalp.pdf) give an algorithm that makes \(\widetilde{O}(n^{1/3})\) queries. What if one can also query pairs to check if they are edges? This is a standard operation in sublinear graph algorithms. Interestingly, this paper gives an \(\widetilde{O}(n^{1/4})\) query algorithm for this setting. And, if one can get the entire adjacency list in a single query (common in the study of web networks), then there is an \(\widetilde{O}(n^{1/5})\) query algorithm for this setting. This paper, following [Beretta-Tetek](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14948), also studies the case where the number of vertices \(n\) is unknown, in which case the previous complexities change. Overall, there is a nuanced picture of the complexity of estimating the average degree.

**Towards Tight Bounds for Estimating Degree Distribution in Streaming and Query Models** by Arijit Bishnu, Debarshi Chanda, Gopinath Mishra ([arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.21784)). In network science, which is study of real-world large graphs, probably one of the most important graph parameters studied is the degree distribution. Formally, let \(N(d)\) be the number of vertices of degree \(d\). The set \(\{N(d)\}\) is sometimes called the “degree distribution”, though to be precise, it is the “complementary cumulative degree histogram” (ccdh). There is a rich applied history of estimating the ccdh, but the only truly sublinear bound was given by [Eden-Jain-Pinar-Ron-Seshadhri](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.08607\). The actual complexity was a little involved, and your truly had [posed](https://sublinear.info/index.php?title=Open_Problems:98) (in WOLA 2019) the question of determining the optimal bound. Which, I’m happy to say, this paper has nailed down. Ignoring log factors, the complexity is \(\Theta(m/h)\), where \(m\) is the number of edges and \(h\) is the, well, \(h\)-index of the degree distribution (the largest number \(k\) such that there are at least \(k\) vertices of degree at least \(k\)). The algorithm, which is similar to the previous result, is eminently practical and uses a combination of vertex and edge sampling to estimate different part of the distribution. Moreover, the algorithm can be implemented in the streaming setting.

**Location-Invariant Properties of Functions versus Properties of Distributions: United in Testing but Separated in Verification** by Oded Goldreich and Guy Rothblum ([ECCC](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2025/105/)). Let us build up the distribution testing context. Consider a distribution \(\mathcal{D}\) over universe \([n]\). In the standard distribution testing setup, the tester gets samples from this distribution and has to (approximately) decide some property. One could imagine that there is an underlying space/function that actually generates this distribution. So think of \(f:[m] \to [n]\), where \(\mathcal{D}(i)\) is the fraction of the domain values \(j\) where \(f(j) = i\). A distribution property can be translated to the property/set of functions that induce the desired distributions. In the latter setting, there is more power, since a tester can explicitly query \(j \in [m]\) to get \(f(j)\). (While, in the distribution setting, the tester merely gets \(f(j)\) for a uar \(j \in [m]\).) It turns out that property testing in both settings are basically equivalent. This paper shows, to the contrary, there is a gap between these settings for the verification problem. Consider “doubly sublinear interactive protocols”, so that verifer must run with queries sublinear to the vanilla testing complexity, and the honest prover must run in queries sublinear to the learning complexity. For the classic uniformity testing problem, there is no such interactive protocol in the distribution testing setting. But, interestingly, there is a “doubly sublinear interactive protocol” in the functional setting, where the tester can get \(o(\sqrt{n})\) to verify uniformity.

By Seshadhri

[Read original post](https://ptreview.sublinear.info/2025/08/news-for-july-2025/)
